# Data Modeling with Postgres
## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring us on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, I designed data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. I have used fact and dimension tabes for star schema for a particular analytic focus, and have written an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.


# Data Sets Used
[Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/)
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`
   
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`

[Log Dataset](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim)
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`


## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, I have created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

**Fact Table

**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
* songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
**Dimension Tables

**users** - users in the app
* user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
**songs** - songs in music database
* song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
**artists** - artists in music database
* artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
* start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday



## Create Tables
**sql_queries.py** has all **CREATE** statements in  to create each table.
**sql_queries.py** has all **DELETE** statements yo drop tables.
You will have to Run **create_tables.py** to create your database and tables.
Run **test.ipynb** to confirm the creation of your tables with the correct columns. 
**Make sure to click "Restart kernel" to close the connection to the database after running this notebook.**

## Build ETL Pipeline

**Please check the notebook for complete pipleline**
**etl.py** is used to process the entire datasets. Remember to run create_tables.py before running etl.py to reset your tables. Run test.ipynb to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.

NOTE: You will not be able to run test.ipynb, etl.ipynb, or etl.py until you have run create_tables.py at least once to create the sparkifydb database, which these other files connect to.


## Running the pipeline

`python run create_tables.py`
`python run etl.py`

Check your results by using test.ipynb


I would like to thank udacity for their wornderful course on Data Engineering and giving me this opportunity to work on this project